---
layout: default
title: Array and Classes - Zipcode lookup
type: Homework
number: 00
active_tab: homework
release_date: 2024-09-01
due_date: 2024-09-12 23:59:00EDT

---

<!-- Check whether the assignment is ready to release -->
{% capture today %}{{'now' | date: '%s'}}{% endcapture %}
{% capture release_date %}{{page.release_date | date: '%s'}}{% endcapture %}
{% if release_date > today %} 
<div class="alert alert-danger">
Warning: this assignment is out of date.  It may still need to be updated for this year's class.  Check with your instructor before you start working on this assignment.
</div>
{% endif %}
<!-- End of check whether the assignment is up to date -->


<!-- Check whether the assignment is up to date -->
{% capture this_year %}{{'now' | date: '%Y'}}{% endcapture %}
{% capture due_year %}{{page.due_date | date: '%Y'}}{% endcapture %}
{% if this_year != due_year %} 
<div class="alert alert-danger">
Warning: this assignment is out of date.  It may still need to be updated for this year's class.  Check with your instructor before you start working on this assignment.
</div>
{% endif %}
<!-- End of check whether the assignment is up to date -->



{% if page.materials %}
<div class="alert alert-info">
You can download the materials for this assignment here:
<ul>
{% for item in page.materials %}
<li><a href="{{item.url}}">{{ item.name }}</a></li>
{% endfor %}
</ul>


<i>Remember to make a copy of the notebook into your own Drive by choosing “Save a Copy in Drive” from Colab’s “File” menu.</i>

</div>
{% endif %}





{{page.type}} {{page.number}}: {{page.title}}
=============================================================

_Due: {{page.due_date}}_

## Overview

In this project, we will practice file input, class design and arrays. 
All programming assignments will go through an autograder on Gradescope. The autograder will test for correctness, so it
is important that you pay attention to naming conventions. 
In other words, name
your classes, methods and directories EXACTLY as given here, including cases (otherwise you will receive points off).

All programming assignments in this class will follow the convention of
having a `Driver` program. The driver should be called `Driver<HWNumber>.java` where `<Number>` is replaced with the homework number.
In this assignment, your driver should be called `Driver00.java`.

<!-- In addition, please read the program design principles and code formatting
standards carefully. You are expected to adhere to all stated standards. Violations will result in deductions. -->

## 1 Input File Format
First, download your input file using `wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/BMC-CS-151/BMC-CS-151.github.io/main/hws/hw00/uszipcodes.csv uszipcodes.csv`

The file `uszipcodes.csv` contains all zipcodes used in the United States. Here are the details of the data file’s format:

The first line is a special line, giving some basic info about the file, in the following comma-separated values:

`zip,city,state,population,males,females,`

The remaining lines in the csv file are in the following format:
`<zip>,<city name>,<state code>,<population>,<males>,<females>,`

where the comma-separated fields have the following meanings:

- `zip`: the 5-digit zipcode
- `city name`: name of the town/city with the zipcode
- `state code`: 2-character encoding of the state name
- `population`: population in this zipcode, an integer
- `males`: number of males in this zipcode, an integer
- `females`: number of females in this zipcode, an integer

If you run `head uszipcodes.csv`, you should see something like the following:

```
zip,city,state,population,males,females,
00501,Holtsville,NY,,,,
00544,Holtsville,NY,,,,
00601,Adjuntas,PR,18570,9078,9492,
00602,Aguada,PR,41520,20396,21124,
00603,Aguadilla,PR,54689,26597,28092,
...
```
As you can see from the above, zipcode 00501 belongs to the town of Holtsville, NY, for which we have no population recorded.
In this assignment, you will ignore the population numbers, and store only the zipcode, the town and the state. 

> Note: there are some towns whose names have more than one word, such as “Palm Springs”.

## 2. Place class (12 Points)
In a file called `Place.java`, create a 
class called `Place` to model each zipcode to contain the following
data fields: zipcode, town, state. 
Think about the different data types you could use to store these variables. For this assignment, make them all `String`s to ensure your submission is compatable with the autograder.

In order to support data encapsulation,
these fields should be labeled private. You will thus need a constructor and
several accessor methods in the `Place` class to set up the fields and to access them.

### 2.1 Place constructor

Make sure to include a constructor in your `Place` class according to this
signature:

```java
/** Creates a Place with the given zip, town name, and
* state
* @param zip The 5-digit zip code
* @param town The town name
* @param state The state abbreviation
*/
public Place(String zip, String town, String state)
```

### 2.2 `toString`
Override `toString` of the `Place` class so that 
`System.out.print(p)` and `System.out.println(p)` will print the town and state of `p` in the format
"town, state".

### 2.3 Accessors

Since a place should be immutable, we are not going to create any
setters. Make sure to include accessors for the three instance variables.
In order to match the autgrading (and Java standard), please name your accessors `getZip()`,
`getTown()` and `getState()` and make them all `Public`.


## 3. `LookupZip` class (60 Points)
Write a separate class LookupZip that will contain several public static methods. These methods are the main part of the assignment.
Implement the class LookupZip by implementing the following methods
based on the method signatures and javadocs. Make sure to follow the method signature types exactly in order to pass the autograder.

### 3.1 parseLine (8 Points)

```java
/** Parses one line of input by creating a Place that
* denotes the information in the given line
* @param line One line from the zipcodes file
* @return A Place that contains the relevant information
* (zip code, town, state) from that line
*/
public static Place parseLine(String line)
```

### 3.2 readZipCodes (30 Points)

```java
/** Reads a zipcodes file, parsing every line
   * @param filename The name of the zipcodes file
   * @param numEntries the number of places in the csv file
   * @return The array of Places representing all the
   * data in the file.
   */
  public static Place[] readZipCodes(String filename, int numEntries) throws FileNotFoundException {
```

### 3.3 lookupZip (22 Points)

```java
/** Find a Place with a given zip code
* @param places The array of Place objects to search through
* @param zip The zip code (as a String) to look up
* @return A place that matches the given zip code,
* or null if no such place exists.
*/
public static Place lookupZip(Place[] places, String zip)
```

## 4. Driver (25 Points)

In `Driver00.java`, 
implement a main method that ties it all together.
Your program should continuously prompt the user for a zipcode until the user
enters 00000 to quit.

The driver should take in two command line arguments. First is the csv file that contains the information, second is the number of entries in that csv file. The given CSV has 42613 entries.

Here’s a sample session:

```
zipcode: 19010
Bryn Mawr, PA

zipcode: 99400
No such zipcode

zipcode: 91729
Rancho Cucamonga, CA

zipcode: 00000
Good Bye!
```
## Testing

Your solutions will be run by an autograder. Thus it is important that
you stick to the output format EXACTLY. That means exactly the same amount
of white spaces, exactly the same punctuations and exactly the same error message.
Below are a few tips on how to check for correctness yourself:

1. Test your code on a smaller input file. We provide a
smaller file named `testZip.csv`.

2. Check your output (manually) against the sample output given above.

3. Test some more zipcodes of your choice (your hometown, some other place
you know, or just select a few random lines from the data file).

4. To test your program, download some sample inputs and outputs:
`wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/BMC-CS-151/BMC-CS-151.github.io/main/hws/hw00/in.txt in.txt` and
`wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/BMC-CS-151/BMC-CS-151.github.io/main/hws/hw00/out.txt out.txt` 

Provided `in.txt` contains 17 test inputs and `out.txt` contains the expected output if you ran your program with `in.txt`. 
Of course, you are not expected to type each input into your program by hand. You
should use the command-line redirection feature of the Linux shell, which
re-directs terminal I/O to files, like this:

```java Driver00 uszipcodes.csv 42613 < in.txt > my-out.txt```

`<` specifies replacing terminal input with the named file
`>` specifies placing terminal output into the named file
The Linux command `diff` can be used to compare two files for differences.
If your program works correctly, `diff my-out.txt out.txt` should return
nothing.

## README.txt

In a text file called `README.txt` answer the following questions:

1. How much time did you spend on the homework
1. What did you learn from this homework
1. optional: What did you struggle with during this homework
1. optional: any other feedback you would like to share

## Submitting

Submit the following files to the assignment called `HW00` on Gradescope:

1. `Driver00.java`
2. `Place.java`
3. `LookupZip.java`
4. `README.txt`

Make sure to name these files exactly what we specify here. Otherwise,
our autograders might not work and we might have to take points off.
**DO NOT** submit a *.docx* or *.pdf* file.

#### Copying the files 
You will likely want to submit the files from your own laptop/computer.
To copy the files from `goldengate` to your own machine, 
open up a terminal on your own computer. If you have a mac or linux, you can use the 
Terminal application, if you have a windows you can use the Powershell app.

Run the following command:

```bassh
$ scp <username>@goldengate.cs.brynmawr.edu/home/<username>/cs151/homeworks/hw00/*
```

Make sure to replace `<username>` with your username. `scp` is a command to secure-copy files
from one server to another. In this case, from `goldengate` to your own machine.

