---
layout: default
title: ArrayList and Inheritance - <br> Zipcodes with populations and locations
type: Homework
number: 01
active_tab: homework
release_date: 2024-02-04
due_date: 2024-02-08 23:59:00EDT

---

<!-- Check whether the assignment is ready to release -->
{% capture today %}{{'now' | date: '%s'}}{% endcapture %}
{% capture release_date %}{{page.release_date | date: '%s'}}{% endcapture %}
{% if release_date > today %} 
<div class="alert alert-danger">
Warning: this assignment is out of date.  It may still need to be updated for this year's class.  Check with your instructor before you start working on this assignment.
</div>
{% endif %}
<!-- End of check whether the assignment is up to date -->


<!-- Check whether the assignment is up to date -->
{% capture this_year %}{{'now' | date: '%Y'}}{% endcapture %}
{% capture due_year %}{{page.due_date | date: '%Y'}}{% endcapture %}
{% if this_year != due_year %} 
<div class="alert alert-danger">
Warning: this assignment is out of date.  It may still need to be updated for this year's class.  Check with your instructor before you start working on this assignment.
</div>
{% endif %}
<!-- End of check whether the assignment is up to date -->



{% if page.materials %}
<div class="alert alert-info">
You can download the materials for this assignment here:
<ul>
{% for item in page.materials %}
<li><a href="{{item.url}}">{{ item.name }}</a></li>
{% endfor %}
</ul>


<i>Remember to make a copy of the notebook into your own Drive by choosing “Save a Copy in Drive” from Colab’s “File” menu.</i>

</div>
{% endif %}





{{page.type}} {{page.number}}: {{page.title}}
=============================================================

_Due: {{page.due_date}}_

## Overview

In this assignment, you will practice object-oriented design with inheritance. 
You will be building on top of your Homework 0 which parsed zipcodes from `uszipcodes.csv`.
You will use the csv file as well as your implementation of `Place.java` and `LookupZip.java`
You will also use the `ExpandableArray.java` implementation you wrote in Lab2.
Copy all four to your hw1 directory.

<br>
In this assignment, we'll also use a second input file `ziplocs.csv`. Download it with this command:
`wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/BMC-CS-151/BMC-CS-151.github.io/main/hws/hw01/ziplocs.csv ziplocs.csv`

which gives information about zipcodes and their associated latitudes and longitudes (as decimal numbers), among other things (but not
population). Your task this week is to weave these two files together and organize
the data into classes stored in an `ExpandableArray` that allows us to perform similiar
lookups as those in Homework 0.

All programming assignments will go through an autograder on Gradescope. 
The autograder will test for correctness.
We are providing you some public tests that you can use on your own.

In this assignment, your driver program should be called
`Driver01.java`.

In addition, please read the program design principles and code formatting
standards carefully. You are expected to adhere to all stated standards. Violations will result in deductions.

> Requirement: You can ONLY include the following import statements:
>
> import java.io.File;
>
> import java.io.FileNotFoundException;
>
> import java.util.Scanner;
>
>You are NOT ALLOWED to include any other import statements in your solutions. That means
you cannot use any built-in java data structures.

## 1 Input File Format
The file `ziplocs.csv` contains a header line at the top with column names. 
The following rows contain 12
comma-separated fields that look like this:

```
"07677","STANDARD","WOODCLIFF LAKE","NJ","PRIMARY",41.02,-74.05,"NA-US-NJ-WOODCLIFF LAKE","false",2945,5471,325436960
```

We will only use three of these fields, the zipcode (1st column), the latitude (6th column) and the
longitude (7th column). In the sample line notice that 07677 is in quotes, but 41.02 and -74.05 are not.
<!--- As in the last assignment, some lines are missing some information, but all lines 
have the correct number of commas (11). --->

In your last assignment, you only read the zipcode, town and state fields from
`uszipcodes.csv`, but ignored the population information. In this homework, you'll use the 
total population field `in uszipcodes.csv` as well. Note that some fields are missing in the csv, and not every row has an entry for the population.

By using the data between `uszipcodes.csv` and `ziplocs.csv`, we 
can categorize all zipcodes into one of three categories: 
1. `PopulatedPlace` - zipcodes with a population and location, 
2. `LocatedPlace` - zipcodes with a location only, 
3. `Place` - zip codes without either. 

These types naturally form an inheritance hierarchy. Think about what the hierarchy should be before you click the answer.
Hint: The top-most parent (superclass) should be the most abstract.

<details><summary><b style="color:DodgerBlue;">Hierarchy:</b></summary>
Place <br>
     ^ <br>
     | <br>
LocatedPlace <br>
     ^ <br>
     | <br>
PopulatedPlace
</details> 

<!-- `PopulatedPlace` is a subclass of `LocatedPlace` (every `PopulatedPlace` is also a
`LocatedPlace`) and `LocatedPlace` is a subclass of `Place` (every `LocatedPlace` is
also a `Place`). -->

## 2. LocatedPlace

Write a new class `LocatedPlace` that is a subclass of `Place`. 
Remember that a subclass inherits all the `public` or `protected` fields and methods in the superclass (except the constructor).
Include a constructor and any necessary instance variables and getters.

The `LocatedPlace` class must have an overridden `toString` method that
includes the location information in the string returned. For example, a
`LocatedPlace` representing Bryn Mawr would return the string

```
Bryn Mawr, PA 40.02 -75.31
```

## 3. PopulatedPlace

Write a new class `PopulatedPlace` that is a subclass of `LocatedPlace`. 
Include a constructor and any necessary instance variables and getters.

The `PopulatedPlace` class must also override the `toString` method to include the place’s population in the string. A `PopulatedPlace` representing
Bryn Mawr should return the string 

```
Bryn Mawr, PA 40.02 -75.31 21103
```

## 4. LookupZip

Modify the `readZipCodes` method from `LookupZip` to read both data files,
constructing an `ExpandableArray` of `Places` and returns it. 
The method will be modified to take two arguments:
```
   /** 
   * @param filename The name of the uszipcodes file
   * @param filename2 The name of the second csv file with location info
   * @return An ExpandableArray of Places
   */
```
Assume that we don't know how many entries are in the csv files.

If a place’s population is known, it should be represented by a `PopulatedPlace` object.  <br>
Otherwise, if a place’s location is known, it should be represented by a `LocatedPlace` object. <br>
otherwise it will be represented by a `Place` object. <br>

Note that the return value is an `ExapndableArray` of `Place`s. 
Since both `LocatedPlace`s and `PopulatedPlace`s are `Place`s, all types can be in the return value;

This new version returns an `ExpandableArray`, not an array. 
This will cause compiler type errors with your old code that used arrays.
You need to adapt your old `parseLine` or `lookupZip` accordingly.

> Requirement: One restriction is that `readZipCodes` should read each file only once: that
is, you should create a new `Scanner` for each file only once, not repeatedly.
You should also not reset these `Scanners`. You should read in one file first,
create objects to accumulate the partial data in that file, and then read the
other file, combining the entries appropriately. Note that the zipcodes in the
files are not in the same order.

## 5. Driver01
You can copy the driver from your last homework assignment
into a new file called `Driver01.java`

Update the `main` method to work with your new methods. It will now take as command line input two Strings: one for each filename.
I would recommend compiling all your java files with: 
`javac *.java` at this point. In general, compiling as you code, rather than once at the end is a good debugging strategy.
Many of the compiler errors will be regarding type mismatches since we are now using  `ExpandableArray<Place>` instead of `Place[]`.

Once you've fixed the compiler errors, you can run the code with:
```
java Driver01 uszipcodes.csv ziplocs.csv
```

You'll see the same output you had in the previous homework.
At this point, you've created version of HW0 which does not assume anything about the length of the input csv files.
This is because we are using the `ExpandableArray` data structure instead of a fixed length array.

Now, your task will be to modify the functionality to practice inheritance.

Recall that the appropriate `toString()` will be used when you print your three different
objects of the `Place` type hierachy.

Here’s a sample session of running your driver:

```
zipcode: 19010
Bryn Mawr, PA 40.02 -75.31 21103

zipcode: 99400
No such zipcode

zipcode: 91729
Rancho Cucamonga, CA 34.09 -117.56

zipcode: 97252
Portland, OR

zipcode: 00000
Good Bye! 
```

## Design Considerations

As you start implementing the functionality, you should think about these design questions
and come up with answers for them:

Currently, your `parseLine` function in `LookupZip.java` returns a `Place`. 
Consider the following:
1. How do you determine if a zipcode should be a `PopulatedPlace`, a `LocatedPlace`, or
just a `Place`?
2. The total population field in `uszipcodes.csv` is not filled out for some lines.
How do you detect that it is missing? Hint: research `split` and learn about
the overloaded version with a second parameter limit.
3. When the population field is not filled for a zipcode in `uszipcodes.csv`,
what object do you construct? And if the field is not empty, what object do you construct?


Currently, your `readZipCodes` only scans a single file. You must create two `Scanners` (one for each file).
Read in one entire file first, then read in the second. Consider the following: <br>
1. After you've read in both csvs, you should have two data structures filled with `Place`s (or the appropriate subclass).
2. You should merge them into a single data structure with one entry for each zip code. How will you collate the information between both csvs?
3. Note that the zipcode field in `ziplocs.csv` has double quotes around it. You should
remove the quotes (after reading in - don’t modify the input file!) or you will
not be able to match them with the zipcodes found in `uszipcodes.csv`. I
recommend using `replace` from the Java `String` library (use the Java API
reference to find out how).

## README.txt

In a text file called `README.txt` answer the following questions:

1. How much time did you spend on the homework
1. What did you learn from this homework
1. optional: What did you struggle with during this homework
1. optional: any other feedback you would like to share

## Submitting

Submit the following files to the assignment called `HW01` on Gradescope:

1. `Driver01.java`
2. `Place.java`
2. `LocatedPlace.java`
2. `PopulatedPlace.java`
3. `LookupZip.java`
4. `ExpandableArray.java`
4. `README.txt`

Make sure to name these files exactly what we specify here. Otherwise,
our autograders might not work and we might have to take points off.
<br>
**DO NOT** submit a *.docx* or *.pdf* file.
<br>
**DO NOT** submit any `.class` files or any of the `csv` files.

#### Copying the files 
You will likely want to submit the files from your own laptop/computer.
To copy the files from `goldengate` to your own machine, 
open up a terminal on your own computer. If you have a mac or linux, you can use the 
Terminal application, if you have a windows you can use the Powershell app.

Run the following command:

```bassh
$ scp <username>@goldengate.cs.brynmawr.edu/home/<username>/cs151/homeworks/hw00/*
```

Make sure to replace `<username>` with your username. `scp` is a command to secure-copy files
from one server to another. In this case, from `goldengate` to your own machine.

