---
layout: default
title: LinkedList - Baby Names
type: Homework
number: 02
active_tab: homework
release_date: 2024-02-11
due_date: 2024-02-18 23:59:00EDT

---

<!-- Check whether the assignment is ready to release -->
{% capture today %}{{'now' | date: '%s'}}{% endcapture %}
{% capture release_date %}{{page.release_date | date: '%s'}}{% endcapture %}
{% if release_date > today %} 
<div class="alert alert-danger">
Warning: this assignment is out of date.  It may still need to be updated for this year's class.  Check with your instructor before you start working on this assignment.
</div>
{% endif %}
<!-- End of check whether the assignment is up to date -->


<!-- Check whether the assignment is up to date -->
{% capture this_year %}{{'now' | date: '%Y'}}{% endcapture %}
{% capture due_year %}{{page.due_date | date: '%Y'}}{% endcapture %}
{% if this_year != due_year %} 
<div class="alert alert-danger">
Warning: this assignment is out of date.  It may still need to be updated for this year's class.  Check with your instructor before you start working on this assignment.
</div>
{% endif %}
<!-- End of check whether the assignment is up to date -->



{% if page.materials %}
<div class="alert alert-info">
You can download the materials for this assignment here:
<ul>
{% for item in page.materials %}
<li><a href="{{item.url}}">{{ item.name }}</a></li>
{% endfor %}
</ul>


<i>Remember to make a copy of the notebook into your own Drive by choosing “Save a Copy in Drive” from Colab’s “File” menu.</i>

</div>
{% endif %}





{{page.type}} {{page.number}}: {{page.title}}
=============================================================

_Due: {{page.due_date}}_

## Overview

In this assignment, we’ll explore linked lists and more complex custom-designed
classes. The complexity of this assignment increases significantly from the previous
two. Start EARLY!

In this assignment, we will use the `LinkedList` you started
implementing in lab
<br>

In this assignment, your driver program should be called
`DriverHW02.java`.

In addition, please read the program design principles and code formatting
standards carefully. You are expected to adhere to all stated standards. Violations will result in deductions.

> Requirement: You can ONLY include the following import statements:
>
> import java.io.File;
>
> import java.io.FileNotFoundException;
>
> import java.util.Scanner;
>
>You are NOT ALLOWED to include any other import statements in your solutions. That means
you cannot use any built-in java data structures.

## 1. Objectives
Imagine you are a data scientist working for a social research organization tasked with analyzing trends in baby names over the years 
in the United States. Your organization aims to provide insights into the evolution 
of popular names and naming patterns, which can be used for various purposes, such as understanding 
cultural shifts, predicting future naming trends, and even informing marketing strategies for baby-related products.

To accomplish this, you will build a "Name Trend Analysis Tool" using a LinkedList. The tool should read in a file containing data from the Social Security Administration (SSA), which includes information about baby names given in different years.

## 2. Functionality

Create a class called `NameLL`. This will be your LinkedList implementation.
The LL must support all the methods from Lab03 (except `insertSortedPop`), including the DoubleLinkedList methods. 
You may also use your `ExpandableArray` class from Lab02, but it is not necessarily required. 

### 2.1 NameNodes

Your LinkedList does not need to enable Generic types. 
You should design a `Name` class that stores all the relevant stats for a particular
name. Your `Node` class should hold data of type `Name`. 

### 2.2

Write a method called `index()` based on the specification below:

```java
/** Returns an integer, indicating the position of the name in your
linked list. The position should be 1-indexed (meaning the first item should be 1).
* state
* @param name - the name to search for
* @return - the index of the name in the LinkedList. If the name is not in the LinkedList, return -1. 
*/
public int index(String name)
```

This method will help verify that the list is sorted alphabetically.

### 2.3

Write a method called `yearStats()` based on the specification below:
```java
/** Returns an array of size three. The first value indicates the rank of the name
** that year, the second value indicates the number of babies given that name during that year (for the gender),
** the third value indicates the percentage of babies given that name that year (for that gender)
* state
* @param name - the name to search for
* @param year - the year for the stats
*
* @return array indicating the rank of the name that year, the number of babies given that name that year (for that gender), percentage - the percentage of babies given that name that year (for that gender). If the name is not in the LinkedList, return null.
*/
public double[] yearStats(String name, int year)
```

### 2.4

Write a method called `totalStats()` based on the specification below:
```java
/** Returns an array of size three: for a given gender, the rank of the name, the numebr of babies with that name,
**  the percentage of babies with that name
* state
* @param name - the name to search for
*
* @return array of int, int double. If the name is not in the LinkedList, return null.
*/
public double[] totalStats(String name)
```

The methods described in sections 2.3 and 2.4 will become more clear as you read the rest of the assignment. 

## 3. DriverHW02.java

You will implement your "Name Trend Analysis Tool" in a java program called
`DriverHW02.java`.

Your driver must read in file(s) of yearly baby name statistics
and store the statistics in two linked lists, -- one for male names and
one for female names. You will use your implemented LinkedList data structure,
you are not allowed to use Java’s built-in
`LinkedList`. The two linked lists should be kept in alphabetically sorted order by
name.

Specifically, the program needs to be able to look up a name and report the following
statistics:

1. Linked list index - just an integer indicating the position of the name in your
linked list so that we can verify your list is sorted alphabetically.
2. For each year:
  -  rank - the rank of the name that year (for that gender)
  -  number - the number of babies given that name that year (for that
gender)
  - percentage - the percentage of babies given that name that year (for
that gender)
3. Total:
  - rank - the rank of the name among all years (for that gender)
  - number - the number of babies given that name among all years (for
that gender)
  - percentage - the percentage of babies given that name among all years
(for that gender)

For example, for the name “Mary” (female), the following statistics should be
printed for all 28 files:

```
1424

1990
Mary: 35, 8666, 0.005432

1991
Mary: 38, 8760, 0.005596

...

2017
Mary: 126, 2381, 0.001877

Total
Mary: 51, 142630, 0.003630
```

> Note: not all names appear in all years. The popularity of names vary greatly
from generation to generation. If a name doesn’t appear in a particular data file,
you should skip printing that particular year all together.

The year for specific data can be discerned by the filename.

### 3.1 Command Line Arguments

Your program should take in command-line arguments to input zero or more
files names to process.
The flags `-m` name `-f` name indicate a male name or a female name to
look up, respectively. For example:

```java DriverHW02 -f Dianna names1990.csv names2000.csv```

will print out the index followed by the rank, number and percentages of the
female name Dianna used in 1990, 2000 as well as the combined statistics of these
two years, as shown below. 398 is the alphabetical index order of the name `Dianna`
from these two years.

```
398

1990
Dianna: 594, 384, 0.000241

2000
Dianna: 847, 262, 0.000182

Total
Dianna: 675, 646, 0.000213
```

### 3.2 Searching for more than one name
Your tool must allow a user to search for as many names as
they would like. When the user adds a name to search for 
when running the program in the command line, they will 
add a -f or -m to indicate the gender they are searching for.

 For example, 
```
java DriverHW02 -f Dianna -m Adam names1990.csv names2000.csv
```
or 

```
java DriverHW02 -f Dianna -f Aline names1990.csv names2000.csv 
```

are both valid inputs.
You may assume that the list of filenames is always last after
the names, i.e. the first non-flag argument you encounter is assumed to be 
the beginning of the list of file names.

Make sure you error-check your arguments thoroughly, i.e. illegal/badly-formated
options, non-existent options, etc. Remember the order of flags should not matter.
Your program should behave rationally no matter how unreasonable the input or
the value of flags. Simply reporting error and quitting are completely acceptable
for bad input. Throwing uncaught exceptions or giving errorneous output are not.
Try at the Linux commandline to see examples of flag and error handling -just
experiment with say ls and flags.

If the user enters a name that is not present in the input files print "That name isn't in our data."

### 3.3 Multiple files

Remember that the wildcard * expansion will let you specify multiple file names
that fit a certain pattern easily, for example:

```
java DriverHW02 -f Dianna names200*
```

will be automatically expanded to:

```
java DriverHW02 -f Dianna names2000.csv names2001.csv names2002.csv
names2003.csv names2004.csv names2005.csv names2006.csv names2007.csv
names2008.csv names2009.csv
```

by the shell for you. Using this feature to test will reduce tedious typing.

## 4. Input File Format

We’ll be taking input from files containing lines in the following format:

```
rank,male-name,male-number,female-name,female-number
```

where the comma-separated fields have the following meanings:

- `rank`: the ranking of the names in this file
- `male-name`: a male name of this rank
- `male-number`: number of males with this name
- `female-name`: a female name of this rank
- `female-number`: number females with this name

This is the format of database files obtained from the U.S. Social Secutiry Administration 
of the top 1000 registered baby names. Each line begins with a rank,
followed by the male name at that rank, followed by the number of males with
that name, etc. Here is an example showing data from the year 2002:

```
1,Jacob,30568,Emily,24463
2,Michael,28246,Madison,21773
3,Joshua,25986,Hannah,18819
4,Matthew,25151,Emma,16538
5,Ethan,22108,Alexis,15636
6,Andrew,22017,Ashley,15342
7,Joseph,21891,Abigail,15297
8,Christopher,21681,Sarah,14758
9,Nicholas,21389,Samantha,14662
10,Daniel,21315,Olivia,14630
...
996,Ean,157,Johana,221
997,Jovanni,157,Juana,221
998,Alton,156,Juanita,221
999,Gerard,156,Katerina,221
1000,Keandre,156,Amiya,220
```

As you can see from the above, in 2002, there were 30,568 male babies named
Jacob and 24,463 female babies named Emily, making them the most popular
names used in that year. Similarly, going down the list, we see that there were 220
newborn females named Amiya, making it the 1000th most popular female baby
name.

The entire data set contains a file for each year from 1990 to 2017, named
`names1990.csv`, ... , `names2017.csv` respectively.

You can download the csv files with the following command:
`wget https://github.com/BMC-CS-151/BMC-CS-151.github.io/raw/main/hws/hw02/hw2_data.zip`
Note that these `csv` files, unlike the previous hw, do not contain column headers. 

## 5. Design Notes, Recommendations, & Testing
Computing the yearly percentages, as well as total number and total percentage
require additional auxiliary data structures besides the linked lists. Consider what
you need and decide where and how to store the information carefully.

Calculating total rank is non-trivial. Think through your data structure and al-
gorithm needs before you start. You should write the program so that it makes

the best use of available storage. Resist the urge to store redundant information
in many different places.



Suggested steps below. 
We suggest you follow the steps below when implementing
your solutions.
Note that for each step, you should test with one input file,
then multiple input files (Just print partial contents of your linked lists), before
moving onto the next one. You can hardcode the filenames in the early steps. This
will get fixed once you have step 3 and beyond working.

1. Read the files into two lists of unique names in sorted order. (your `Name` class
needs to have only a `String`, for now). If you are having trouble debugging
the sorted order, we suggest creating a smaller input-file (by keeping only the
first 10 or 20 names) and using that instead. 

	> Hint: you can use the `head` command in terminal to get the first 10 lines
from a file. `head -n 10 names2003.csv` will show the first 10 lines
from `names2003.csv`.

2. Expand your `Name` class to provide storage for yearly number and rank.
Modify your file-reading code to create and insert (in sorted order) a new
`Name` object if it’s not already in the list, or update it with the given yearly
stats if it is.
3. Enable single name lookup on a single file (via commandline arguments)
4. Enable single name lookup on multiple (or all) files
5. Compute all the necessary totals to enable yearly percentage reporting and
storing them in reasonable data structures.

6. Compute additional totals to enable total number and total percentage re-
porting

7. Design an algorithm to compute total rank
8. Enable multiple name lookup on multiple files

### 5.1 Testing
- Start by testing manually. Select a few names and input files combinations
to spot check.

- Compare your output with the two samples you see in the data we provided.
The output for Mary isn’t shown for every year, but if the three numbers for
the grand totals match, then you are probably in safe hands.

## README.txt

In a text file called `README.txt` answer the following questions:

1. How do you keep the linked lists in alphabetically sorted order?
2. How much time did you spend on the homework
3. optional: any other feedback you would like to share


## Autograder Formatting
Before submitting to the autograder, make sure you conform to the following format:
1. Do not use any try-catches. Instead add `throws` to your method signatures.
2. Do not use `System.exit` calls


## Submitting

Submit the following files to the assignment called `HW02` on Gradescope:

1. `DriverHW02.java`
2. `NameLL.java`
3. `Name.java`
4. `ExpandableArray.java`
5. `README.txt`
6. Any additional classes you made

Make sure to name these files exactly what we specify here. Otherwise,
our autograders might not work and we might have to take points off.
<br>
**DO NOT** submit a *.docx* or *.pdf* file.
<br>
**DO NOT** submit any `.class` files or any of the `csv` files.

#### Copying the files 
You will likely want to submit the files from your own laptop/computer.
To copy the files from `goldengate` to your own machine, 
open up a terminal on your own computer. If you have a mac or linux, you can use the 
Terminal application, if you have a windows you can use the Powershell app.

Run the following command:

```bassh
$ scp <username>@goldengate.cs.brynmawr.edu/home/<username>/cs151/homeworks/hw00/*
```

Make sure to replace `<username>` with your username. `scp` is a command to secure-copy files
from one server to another. In this case, from `goldengate` to your own machine.

