---
layout: default
title: Stacks and Queues
type: Homework
number: 03
active_tab: homework
release_date: 2024-02-11
due_date: 2024-02-15 23:59:00EDT

---

<!-- Check whether the assignment is ready to release -->
{% capture today %}{{'now' | date: '%s'}}{% endcapture %}
{% capture release_date %}{{page.release_date | date: '%s'}}{% endcapture %}
{% if release_date > today %} 
<div class="alert alert-danger">
Warning: this assignment is out of date.  It may still need to be updated for this year's class.  Check with your instructor before you start working on this assignment.
</div>
{% endif %}
<!-- End of check whether the assignment is up to date -->


<!-- Check whether the assignment is up to date -->
{% capture this_year %}{{'now' | date: '%Y'}}{% endcapture %}
{% capture due_year %}{{page.due_date | date: '%Y'}}{% endcapture %}
{% if this_year != due_year %} 
<div class="alert alert-danger">
Warning: this assignment is out of date.  It may still need to be updated for this year's class.  Check with your instructor before you start working on this assignment.
</div>
{% endif %}
<!-- End of check whether the assignment is up to date -->



{% if page.materials %}
<div class="alert alert-info">
You can download the materials for this assignment here:
<ul>
{% for item in page.materials %}
<li><a href="{{item.url}}">{{ item.name }}</a></li>
{% endfor %}
</ul>


<i>Remember to make a copy of the notebook into your own Drive by choosing “Save a Copy in Drive” from Colab’s “File” menu.</i>

</div>
{% endif %}





{{page.type}} {{page.number}}: {{page.title}}
=============================================================

_Due: {{page.due_date}}_

## Overview

In this assignment, we’ll explore Stacks and Queues.

All files that you need can be downloaded with
`wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/BMC-CS-151/BMC-CS-151.github.io/main/hws/hw03/ArrayStack.java`

`wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/BMC-CS-151/BMC-CS-151.github.io/main/hws/hw03/Deque.java`

`wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/BMC-CS-151/BMC-CS-151.github.io/main/hws/hw03/IntStack.java`

`wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/BMC-CS-151/BMC-CS-151.github.io/main/hws/hw03/Queue.java`

`wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/BMC-CS-151/BMC-CS-151.github.io/main/hws/hw03/Stack.java`


## Requirements.

These requirements apply to the implementations of all parts of the assignment (or two parts,
if you are not doing extra credit).Unless specified, you cannot use any built-in java data structures.

1. For every class, provide two constructors. One constructor should constructs an object (of the corresponding class) of a default size. The other should be a one-parameter constructor that constructs 
an object (of the corresponding class) of the parameter-specified size. 
2. Override `toString` to return a `String` that contains the contents of the
data structure in the following format, starting from the first-in element as
`element1`: `(elment1, element2, ..., elementN)`.
Note that in case of a stack, this means top is printed last.
3. Testing: Every class that you implement must have a corresponding Test file
that contains `JUnit` tests. Be sure to test **all** methods and **all** exceptions as well. Note that it is 
**not** enough to have just one test case for each method; there are plenty of complex interactions between the methods that should be covered as well. (And yes, you need to test toString as well.)
The name of test file should be `Test<ClassName>.java`.

## 1. TwoStacksQueue

A `TwoStacksQueue` object is a `Queue`, meaning that we insert and remove
items based on FIFO - first in first out.
Write a class called `TwoStacksQueue` that implements the `Queue` interface as follows.

Your class will store two `ArrayStack` objects (given in the ArrayStack file you downloaded) as instance variables.
It cannot have any other instance variables.

Since you are using two stacks to simulate a queue, it
will certainly not be the most efficient implementation of a queue and
that’s ok - just as long as you know that and can analyze the runtime
appropriately in the README - see below. There should not be any other
array/ArrayList/linked list used within your implementation.

In your `README`, provide a discussion on the design of your data
structure.
Make sure to describe how you implemented `enqueue` and `dequeue`
operations. In addition, you should provide a worse-case big-O analysis
of each of these operations.

You should use 
`ArrayStack.java` and `Stack.java` and `Queue.java` 
`Queue.java` is an interface which you must implement. Follow the instructions in that interface file for intended behavior. 


**Testing:** Name the test file `TestTwoStacksQueue.java`

## 2. ArrayDeque
In a class called `ArrayDeque`, implement the `Deque` data structure (double-ended queue where we can insert
and delete at both ends) with an array used in a circular fashion.
`Dequeue.java` specifies the
Deque interface that you must implement.

> The discussion in Section 6.3 of the textbook will be very helpful.

**Testing:** Name the test file `TestArrayDeque.java`

## 3. Extra Credit: NewStack
In a file callled `NewStack.java`,
implement a stack data structure called `NewStack`
that supports the usual operations size, `isEmpty`, `push`,
`pop`, `top`.

`NewStack` must support an 
additional operation `minElement`, which returns (but does
not remove) the smallest element currently in the stack.

All operations
(except for `toString`) should run in `O(1)` worst case time - note that this
means no loops of any kind.

There are different designs to achieve the `O(1)`
`minElement`, differing mainly in the amount of additional space. 
Two common approaches are `O(1)` space or `O(n)` space. Explain how your data structure
works in your `README` and justify the `O(1)` runtime of `minElement`, together with
the amount of space used. 

It is acceptable to write a non-generic `NewStack`
that only stores integers and doesn’t implement the `Stack` interface. In that
case, implement the `IntStack` interface instead.

**Testing:** Name the test file `TestNewStack.java`

## Submitting

Submit the following files to the assignment called `HW03` on Gradescope:

1. `TwoStacksQueue.java`
2. `TestTwoStacksQueue.java`
3. `ArrayDeque.java`
3. `TestArrayDeque.java`
4. `NewStack.java`
4. `README.txt`

Make sure to name these files exactly what we specify here. Otherwise,
our autograders might not work and we might have to take points off.
<br>
**DO NOT** submit a *.docx* or *.pdf* file.
<br>
**DO NOT** submit any `.class` files or any of the `csv` files.
<br>
**DO NOT** submit any of the provided interfaces. We will use the ones
we provide for testing.

#### Copying the files 
You will likely want to submit the files from your own laptop/computer.
To copy the files from `goldengate` to your own machine, 
open up a terminal on your own computer. If you have a mac or linux, you can use the 
Terminal application, if you have a windows you can use the Powershell app.

Run the following command:

```bassh
$ scp <username>@goldengate.cs.brynmawr.edu/home/<username>/cs151/homeworks/hw00/*
```

Make sure to replace `<username>` with your username. `scp` is a command to secure-copy files
from one server to another. In this case, from `goldengate` to your own machine.

