---
layout: default
title: HW04 Binary Search - Zipcodes again
type: Homework
number: 04
active_tab: homework
release_date: 2024-02-22
due_date: 2024-02-29 23:59:00EDT

---

<!-- Check whether the assignment is ready to release -->
{% capture today %}{{'now' | date: '%s'}}{% endcapture %}
{% capture release_date %}{{page.release_date | date: '%s'}}{% endcapture %}
{% if release_date > today %} 
<div class="alert alert-danger">
Warning: this assignment is out of date.  It may still need to be updated for this year's class.  Check with your instructor before you start working on this assignment.
</div>
{% endif %}
<!-- End of check whether the assignment is up to date -->


<!-- Check whether the assignment is up to date -->
{% capture this_year %}{{'now' | date: '%Y'}}{% endcapture %}
{% capture due_year %}{{page.due_date | date: '%Y'}}{% endcapture %}
{% if this_year != due_year %} 
<div class="alert alert-danger">
Warning: this assignment is out of date.  It may still need to be updated for this year's class.  Check with your instructor before you start working on this assignment.
</div>
{% endif %}
<!-- End of check whether the assignment is up to date -->



{% if page.materials %}
<div class="alert alert-info">
You can download the materials for this assignment here:
<ul>
{% for item in page.materials %}
<li><a href="{{item.url}}">{{ item.name }}</a></li>
{% endfor %}
</ul>


<i>Remember to make a copy of the notebook into your own Drive by choosing “Save a Copy in Drive” from Colab’s “File” menu.</i>

</div>
{% endif %}





{{page.type}} {{page.number}}: {{page.title}}
=============================================================

_Due: {{page.due_date}}_

## Overview


### Lab 6 (Iterators)

Since Lab06 was more involved than the other labs, Lab06 will count towards this homework grade. 

## Binary Search

Rewrite your HW 1 to use more efficient searching techniques. In order to use binary search, your list must be sorted. 
Depending on your implementation (which file you scanned in first), your `ExpandableArray` may already be in lexicographic order after you are done processing. If it is sorted, you can move on. Otherwise, sort your list after processing. 

## LookupZip
Modify the `lookupZip` method to use binary search instead. 
You must implement a binary search from scratch and 
you are not allowed to use Java’s
built-in `Collections.binarySearch`. Note also that object comparisons
should be done via `compareTo`.

If you didn’t call lookupZip when you were weaving in the data from ziplocs.csv,
you should rewrite that other lookup method to use your binary search too.

## Requirements.

The rest of the restrictions and requirements for Assignment 1 remain. 
Testing should use the same test inputs and outputs as Assignment 1 as well.

## Testing

For this assignment you do not need to write any JUnit tests.
However, your code must pass the checkstyle.

In this assignment we will use commandline redirection.

Instead of typing zipcode inputs as you are prompted, you can write them in a file and pass them to your program as follows:     
`java DriverHW04 uszipcodes.csv ziplocs.csv < in.txt`

Where `in.txt` contains the zipcodes you will to test with one on each line.
You can download `in.txt` with: `wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/BMC-CS-151/BMC-CS-151.github.io/main/hws/hw04/in.txt`


Time your old and new implementation by running:
`time java DriverHW04 uszipcodes.csv ziplocs.csv < in.txt`

Compare the result with your Assignment 1 implementation. Is there a
speedup? Report your findings in your README.

## Submitting

Submit the following files to the assignment called `HW04` on Gradescope

1. `DriverHW04.java`
2. `Place.java`
3. `LocatedPlace.java`
4. `PopulatedPlace.java `
5. `LookUpZip.java`
6. `ExpandableArray.java`
7. `README.txt`

and Lab files:  
8. `ArrayList.java`  
9. `List.java`    
10. `MyIterator.java`  
11. `TestIterator.java`   
12. `TestMyListIterator.java`  
13. `TestRemovePositions.java`  


Make sure to name these files exactly what we specify here. Otherwise,
our autograders might not work and we might have to take points off.
<br>
**DO NOT** submit a *.docx* or *.pdf* file.
<br>
**DO NOT** submit any `.class` files or any of the `csv` files.
<br>
**DO NOT** submit any of the provided interfaces. We will use the ones
we provide for testing.

#### Copying the files 
You will likely want to submit the files from your own laptop/computer.
To copy the files from `goldengate` to your own machine, 
open up a terminal on your own computer. If you have a mac or linux, you can use the 
Terminal application, if you have a windows you can use the Powershell app.

Run the following command:

```bassh
$ scp <username>@goldengate.cs.brynmawr.edu/home/<username>/cs151/homeworks/hw00/*
```

Make sure to replace `<username>` with your username. `scp` is a command to secure-copy files
from one server to another. In this case, from `goldengate` to your own machine.

