---
layout: default
title: Binary Trees & Polling 
type: Homework
number: 05
active_tab: homework
release_date: 2023-11-08
due_date: 2023-11-15 23:59:00EDT

---

<!-- Check whether the assignment is ready to release -->
{% capture today %}{{'now' | date: '%s'}}{% endcapture %}
{% capture release_date %}{{page.release_date | date: '%s'}}{% endcapture %}
{% if release_date > today %} 
<div class="alert alert-danger">
Warning: this assignment is out of date.  It may still need to be updated for this year's class.  Check with your instructor before you start working on this assignment.
</div>
{% endif %}
<!-- End of check whether the assignment is up to date -->


<!-- Check whether the assignment is up to date -->
{% capture this_year %}{{'now' | date: '%Y'}}{% endcapture %}
{% capture due_year %}{{page.due_date | date: '%Y'}}{% endcapture %}
{% if this_year != due_year %} 
<div class="alert alert-danger">
Warning: this assignment is out of date.  It may still need to be updated for this year's class.  Check with your instructor before you start working on this assignment.
</div>
{% endif %}
<!-- End of check whether the assignment is up to date -->



{% if page.materials %}
<div class="alert alert-info">
You can download the materials for this assignment here:
<ul>
{% for item in page.materials %}
<li><a href="{{item.url}}">{{ item.name }}</a></li>
{% endfor %}
</ul>


<i>Remember to make a copy of the notebook into your own Drive by choosing “Save a Copy in Drive” from Colab’s “File” menu.</i>

</div>
{% endif %}





{{page.type}} {{page.number}}: {{page.title}}
=============================================================

_Due: {{page.due_date}}_

## Overview
 For this assignment and the next one you will be working within the same
codebase to look at polling data for the 2020 U.S. presidential election. Before the
two main political parties put forward their nominees for president, the Democratic
and Republican parties hold primary elections to determine who their nominee will
be. The Republican nominee was essentially predetermined to be the incumbent, President
Trump.
The Democratic 
party’s nomination was still very uncertain (at the time). In order to make repeated
predictions about the likely outcome of the Democratic party nomination, pollsters
(statisticians) regularly conduct polls (surveys) to sample Democratic primary
voters and ask who they plan to vote for. These results are compiled, released,
and eagerly tracked by the news media and public to determine which candidate
currently has the largest percentage of support.

In this assignment, your job will be to take the poll results given as input
via CSV files and update the entries of a binary tree so that it stores the name
and current polling percentage for each candidate. In the next assignment you will
modify this tree so that you can easily retrieve the name of the candidate currently
leading in the polls.

## 1. Implement a Binary Tree

Start by implementing the given `BinaryTree` interface
as a `LinkedBinaryTree` so that generic objects that implement 
the `compareTo` method from the `Comparable` interface can be inserted into
your tree.

`wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/BMC-CS-151/BMC-CS-151.github.io/main/hws/hw05/BinaryTree.java`

### Requirements

1. Implement the `BinaryTree` interface as a `LinkedBinaryTree`. Make sure
the implementation is entirely recursive and is a linked data structure, i.e.,
you should **NOT** use any `for` or `while` loops, arrays, `ArrayLists`, etc.
Your `LinkedBinaryTree` should contain two constructors. One which takes no arguments and one which takes a generic data type to initialize the root node.
Hint: you may find it useful to use private helper methods that are called from the
publicly defined method in the interface. 

3. Your implementation should be properly encapsulated, i.e. no implementa-
tion details should be made visible outside of the `LinkedBinaryTree`
class - it should only implement the `BinaryTree` interface. 
Hint: consider making
a private inner class to define a `Node` of the tree.

4. Insertion should be done using the `compareTo` method of the given element
so that smaller elements are put into the left subtree and larger element are
put into the right subtree. (This is a Binary Search Tree!). Insertion of elements that are already in the tree
should <i>replace</i> the current element. When you put your polling data into the
tree this will be equivalent to updating the poll numbers for a candidate. 

5. As part of implementing the BinaryTree interface you will implement all
three orders for tree traversal: `pre-`, `in-`, and `post-order`.
Each traversal will return a string in the form:
<br>```element1 element2 ... elementn```<br>
where the order is determined by the correct order of the traversal. Note
that these methods should also use a recursive design.

6. Implement a `boolean contains(E element)` operation, which returns `true`
if the given element exists in the tree and `false` otherwise.

7. Implement a `boolean remove(E element)` operation, which returns `true` if
the given element exisits and is removed, and `false` otherwise. You should
be sure that this method works seamlessly with the other methods. For
example, in-order traversal should return a string containing the elements in
sorted order even after an element has been removed. Describe your chosen
design for this method in the `README`.

8. You should override the `toString` method to return a `String` that looks like
the following:
```
Tree:
Pre: b a c
In: a b c
Post: a c b
```
Where the first traversal is a pre-order traversal, the second is in-order, and
the last is post-order. This assumes `b` is the root, `a` is the left child of `b`,
and `c` is the right child of `b`.

## 2. Storing Polling Data
The polling data you are given will include the candidate’s full name, their last
name, and the percentage of the people polled who said they would vote for that
candidate.

### Requirements

1. Create a class to store the polling data: `PollingData.java`

2. Have your created class implement the `Comparable` interface so that polling
data objects are put in alphabetical order based on the candidate’s <i>last</i> name.

3. Override the `toString` method to return a `String` with the following for-
matting: 
```
Full Name:5.0
```
where `Full Name` is the candidate’s full name and `5.0` was the candidate’s
polling percentage.

4. Your `PollingData` class should have the following constructor:  `public PollingData(String lastName, String fullName, double percent)`

## 3. Polling Data from CSVs

The website FiveThirtyEight makes polling data for presidential primary candi-
dates available (https://data.fivethirtyeight.com/). We have preprocessed
this data for you so that only the relevant data is included and you will receive
one file per conducted poll.

Each polling data CSV has the following format:

```
answer,candidate_name,pct
Biden,Joseph R. Biden Jr.,25
Sanders,Bernard Sanders,16
```

The first column gives the last name of the candidate, the second column gives the
candidate’s full name, and the final column is the percent the candidate is polling
at in this poll. Note that the given percent can be a floating-point number.

Each file is named something like `dempres_20190310_1.csv` where `dempres`
indicates that these are polling results for the Democratic party presidential primary, 
`20190310` indicates that the polling results were completed on March 10,
2019, and `_1` indicates that these are the results for the first poll completed on
that date (there may be multiple from different sources).

Your job is to create a `DriverHW05.java` that takes the polling data in each file and inserts it into the binary
tree. Your resulting tree should contain the polling data for each candidate from
the most recent date for which there is data from the files given on the command
line. Each polling result will only include some of the candidates.

### Requirements:
1. Take filename input from the command line into the main method of your
DriverHW05.java. You may be given multiple filenames. An example of given 
arguments might be:
`dempres_20190210_1.csv dempres_20190210_2.csv dempres_20190310_1.csv`
or:
`dempres_20190210*.csv`.
Recall that unix shell will expand the `*` for you.

As in HW02, you must be able to handle relative paths. That is, if the csv files are not in the current directory. Ex: `DriverHW05 ../../polls/dempres_20190210_1.csv`   

3. You should process the given files in increasing date order. You may assume
that the files are given in this order.

4. Use your overridden `toString` method to print the tree after polling results
from each new date are inserted. Thus, your resulting printed information
should include one snapshot of the tree per given polling data CSV.

## 4. Extra credit
All extra credit should only be done **after**` successful completion of all of the base
requirements for this assignment. The number of points awarded for extra credit
will be smaller than those for completion of the base requirements and the extra
credit is designed to be <i>harder</i> than those basic requirements as well. You may
choose which of the extra credit options below to pursue and can receive credit
for some and not others where that makes sense. In the case that you implement
ANY extra credit, you must list them in your README so that our grading will
know to test for them and grant credit accordingly.

1. In cases where you are given multiple polling results on the same date, 
average the per-candidate results before inserting the data into the tree, i.e., if
Biden received 25% in one poll and 31% in another poll from the same date,
the inserted polling result should show Biden receiving 28% of the vote.

2. Make sure that the polls are processed in date order no matter what order
they are given to you in on the command line.


## Submitting
Submit the following files to the assignment on Gradescope

1. README: The usual plain text file README
  - Your name
  - Discussion: Design of remove as explained above, and any extra credit
implementations you chose to do.
  - How much time you spent on the assignment
  - What did you learn?
  - (Optional): Any feedback or comments

2. Source files:
   - `LinkedBinaryTree.java`   
   - `PollingData.java`   
   - `DriverHW05.java`   
   - Any other java files you created 

Make sure to name these files exactly what we specify here. Otherwise,
our autograders might not work and we might have to take points off.
<br>
**DO NOT** submit a *.docx* or *.pdf* file.
<br>
**DO NOT** submit any `.class` files or any of the `csv` files.
<br>
**DO NOT** submit any of the provided interfaces. We will use the ones
we provide for testing.

#### Copying the files 
You will likely want to submit the files from your own laptop/computer.
To copy the files from `goldengate` to your own machine, 
open up a terminal on your own computer. If you have a mac or linux, you can use the 
Terminal application, if you have a windows you can use the Powershell app.

Run the following command:

```bassh
$ scp <username>@goldengate.cs.brynmawr.edu/home/<username>/cs151/homeworks/hw00/*
```

Make sure to replace `<username>` with your username. `scp` is a command to secure-copy files
from one server to another. In this case, from `goldengate` to your own machine.

