---
layout: default
title: Heaps & Polling 
type: Homework
number: 06
active_tab: homework
release_date: 2023-11-16
due_date: 2023-11-29 23:59:00EDT

---

<!-- Check whether the assignment is ready to release -->
{% capture today %}{{'now' | date: '%s'}}{% endcapture %}
{% capture release_date %}{{page.release_date | date: '%s'}}{% endcapture %}
{% if release_date > today %} 
<div class="alert alert-danger">
Warning: this assignment is out of date.  It may still need to be updated for this year's class.  Check with your instructor before you start working on this assignment.
</div>
{% endif %}
<!-- End of check whether the assignment is up to date -->


<!-- Check whether the assignment is up to date -->
{% capture this_year %}{{'now' | date: '%Y'}}{% endcapture %}
{% capture due_year %}{{page.due_date | date: '%Y'}}{% endcapture %}
{% if this_year != due_year %} 
<div class="alert alert-danger">
Warning: this assignment is oStart with implementing an array-based binary tree ArrayBinaryTree that implements the given interface BinaryTree from the last assignment. This is your first experience writing two different implementations of the same data structure (that conform to the same interface). Most of what you need to do below should have been practiced in Lab08, so make sure your lab is working first.ut of date.  It may still need to be updated for this year's class.  Check with your instructor before you start working on this assignment.
</div>
{% endif %}
<!-- End of check whether the assignment is up to date -->



{% if page.materials %}
<div class="alert alert-info">
You can download the materials for this assignment here:
<ul>
{% for item in page.materials %}
<li><a href="{{item.url}}">{{ item.name }}</a></li>
{% endfor %}
</ul>


<i>Remember to make a copy of the notebook into your own Drive by choosing “Save a Copy in Drive” from Colab’s “File” menu.</i>

</div>
{% endif %}





{{page.type}} {{page.number}}: {{page.title}}
=============================================================

_Due: {{page.due_date}}_

## Overview
For this assignment, you’ll continue your previous investigation of Democratic
primary polling data by determining which candidate is currently in the lead.

## 1. Implement a **Max** Heap

First, download the `PriorityQueue` interface: `wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/BMC-CS-151/BMC-CS-151.github.io/main/hws/hw06/PriorityQueue.java`

You should start by implementing the given `PriorityQueue`
interface with a heap so that generic objects that implement the 
`compareTo` function from the
`Comparable` interface can be inserted into your priority queue.

### Requirements

**For this assignment (as in the lab), you can assume a max capacity of 100 and do not need to expand your underlying array.**

1. Start with implementing an array-based binary tree `ArrayBinaryTree`
that implements the given interface `BinaryTree`
from the last assignment. This is your first
experience writing two different implementations of the same data structure
(that conform to the same interface). Most of what you need to do below
should have been practiced in Lab08, so make sure your lab is working first.

	A. You are not required to use only recursive implementation techniques this time around (because recursive is not the best choice for array-based). You only need to implement a binary tree, not a binary search tree. However, your binary tree should be complete. 

	B. Remember that an arbitrary binary tree is not guaranteed to be complete (for example, the user might execute `remove` on any element any time) and you need to handle the case where positions may become `null` through out your tree.

	C. The three traversal methods have the same specification as the last homework.

	D. Override `toString` the same way as the last assignment, i.e. For a tree rooted at b with a left node a and a right node c, return a string of the following format:
	```
	Tree:
	Pre: b a c
	In: a b c
	Post: a c b
	```
	Where the first traversal is a pre-order traversal, the second is in-order, and the last is post-order.

	E. Add a method `toStringBreadthFirst` which returns a string containing the elements of the tree traversed in breadth-first traversal order. Note that this method is not in the interface because it is not a common traversal order for all binary trees, but is useful for displaying/debugging array-based ones. 

2. Now implement the `PriorityQueue` interface as a `ArrayHeap` which 
extends `ArrayBinaryTree`. Note that it is recommended to add protected or
private helper methods in both `ArrayBinaryTree` and `ArrayHeap` as you
design deems necessary. On the other hand, your implementation should be
properly encapsulated, i.e. no implementation details should be made visible
outside of the `ArrayHeap` or `ArrayBinaryTree` classes. In other words, any
method that leaks implementation details should not be public. 

	A. Your implementation of `insert` should use the `compareTo` method of
the given element to determine which order to arrange the priority
queue. Insertion of elements that are already in the tree should <i>update</i>
the current element in the priority queue while making any updates
necessary to guarantee the heap property. When you put your polling
data into the tree this will be equivalent to updating the poll numbers
for a candidate. Since this heap will be used to store polling data, you
should be implementing this as a <i>maximum</i> heap, so that we will be
able to easily retrieve the current top candidate. Note that there is very
little actual difference between a max-heap and the min-heap you saw
in class and implemented in lab. The only change should occur with `compareTo`.

	B. Your implementation of `remove` should ensure the heap property is
maintained. If the given element can not be found in the heap, this
method should do nothing and return `false`.

	C. Override `toString` to return a `String` representation of the heap in
breadth-first order, level by level. For example, for the min-heap you
constructed in Lab8 via inserting 9 down to 0 into the heap, its string represention should look like this:
	```
	0
	1 4
	3 2 8 5
	9 6 7
	```

   If you inserted 9 down to 0 into a max-heap instead, its string representation should look like this:
	```
	9
	8 7
	6 5 4 3
	2 1 0
	```
  Hint: You may want to use a Stack. 

## 2. Top Candidates
While a heap is usually required only to return the maximum (or minimum) element, 
since this heap will be used to store polling data, it may be interesting 
to us to retrieve the top few candidates.

### Requirements:

1. Add a method `ArrayList<E> peekTopN(int n)` that returns the top elements 
of the heap in order. If the heap has less elements than `n` return all elements in the heap in descending order. The heap should not be any different after the
method was called than it was before the method was called, i.e., this is
similar to `peek` in that it does not remove the top element. You should not
implement this method by removing and then reinserting each element, as
this has the potential to modify the heap. 

3. Describe your design of the peekTopN method in your README file and
give a big-O analysis.

## 3. Command Line Input

As in the previous assignment, you will take filenames that store polling data as
arguments to your main method. Your resulting heap should contain the polling
data for each candidate from the most recent date for which there is data from the
files given on the command line. The resulting heap should be ordered so that the
candidate with the highest percentage of voters in the most recent poll is at the
top of the heap.

Additionally, you will add an option for the users to provide a flag that will
run your `peekTopN` method to determine and print out the top `N` candidates. The
resulting arguments you should handle will look like this: 
`-n 5 dempres_20190210_1.csv dempres_20190210_2.csv`.
In this case, the top 5 candidates would be displayed.

Finally, you will add another optional argument to remove some candidates
from consideration. The full set of arguments you should handle will look like this:
`-n 5 -r Biden Bloomberg dempres_20190210_1.csv dempres_20190210_2.csv`
In the above case you would print out the top 5 candidates who are not Biden or
Bloomberg based on the polling data in the given files.

You will need a `PollingData` class. Start by copying over your implementation from the previous assignment. 
Note that this heap is sorted by polling percentage rather than last name. 
Modify your `PollingData` class to reflect this. Keep in mind that `insert` should still replace a candidate element with the same _last name_.


### Requirements:

1. Take filename input from the command line into the main method of your
`DriverHW06.java`. You may be given multiple filenames. Also note that just like
in HW02, you should expect that the input filenames may have additional (/-
separated) path in front of the filenames.

2. Process an optional flag to print out the top N candidates. These should be
printed out like this (where the example given is for N = 2):
```
Top 2 Candidates:
Joseph R. Biden Jr.:29.0
Kamala D. Harris:15.0
```
The above printout should happen once after all polling data has been inserted. 

3. Process the optional `−r` flag to remove candidates. This should be done so
that the top N candidates do not include any removed candidates if they
are optionally printed out. However you should only perform these remove
operations once. One suggested order for handing these flags is to 1) insert
all the polling data (printing out the heap after each file is inserted), 2)
remove the candidates, and 3) show the top N candidates. In other words, it
is expected that when you print out the heap it will include the candidates
that will later be removed.

4. You many assume that the list of filenames is always last, i.e. the first 
non-flag argument you encounter is assumed to be the beginning of the list of file
names. Make sure you error-check thoroughly, both the arguments to the
flags and the flags themselves. Your program should behave rationally no
matter how unreasonable the input or the value of flags.

Remember the order of flags should not matter, that is,
`-n 5 -r Biden Bloomberg dempres_20190210_1.csv dempres_20190210_2.csv`
and 
`-r Biden Bloomberg -n 5 dempres_20190210_1.csv dempres_20190210_2.csv`
will generate the same output.

5. As in the previous assignment, you should print out the heap after each
polling file is inserted.

## Submitting
Submit the following files to the assignment called `HW06` on Gradescope

1. README: The usual plain text file README
  - Your name:
  - Discussion: Design of peekTopN as explained above
  - How much time you spent on the assignment
  - What did you learn?
  - (Optional): Any feedback or comments

2. Source files:
 - ArrayHeap.java
 - ArrayBinaryTree.java
 - PollingData.java
 - DriverHW06.java

#### Copying the files 
You will likely want to submit the files from your own laptop/computer.
To copy the files from `goldengate` to your own machine, 
open up a terminal on your own computer. If you have a mac or linux, you can use the 
Terminal application, if you have a windows you can use the Powershell app.

Run the following command:

```bassh
$ scp <username>@goldengate.cs.brynmawr.edu/home/<username>/cs151/homeworks/hw00/*
```

Make sure to replace `<username>` with your username. `scp` is a command to secure-copy files
from one server to another. In this case, from `goldengate` to your own machine.

