---
layout: default
title: Zipcodes - AVLTrees
type: Homework
number: 08
active_tab: homework
release_date: 2024-04-21
due_date: 2024-05-09 23:59:00EDT

---

<!-- Check whether the assignment is ready to release -->
{% capture today %}{{'now' | date: '%s'}}{% endcapture %}
{% capture release_date %}{{page.release_date | date: '%s'}}{% endcapture %}
{% if release_date > today %} 
<div class="alert alert-danger">
Warning: this assignment is out of date.  It may still need to be updated for this year's class.  Check with your instructor before you start working on this assignment.
</div>
{% endif %}
<!-- End of check whether the assignment is up to date -->


<!-- Check whether the assignment is up to date -->
{% capture this_year %}{{'now' | date: '%Y'}}{% endcapture %}
{% capture due_year %}{{page.due_date | date: '%Y'}}{% endcapture %}
{% if this_year != due_year %} 
<div class="alert alert-danger">
Warning: this assignment is out of date.  It may still need to be updated for this year's class.  Check with your instructor before you start working on this assignment.
</div>
{% endif %}
<!-- End of check whether the assignment is up to date -->



{% if page.materials %}
<div class="alert alert-info">
You can download the materials for this assignment here:
<ul>
{% for item in page.materials %}
<li><a href="{{item.url}}">{{ item.name }}</a></li>
{% endfor %}
</ul>


<i>Remember to make a copy of the notebook into your own Drive by choosing “Save a Copy in Drive” from Colab’s “File” menu.</i>

</div>
{% endif %}





{{page.type}} {{page.number}}: {{page.title}}
=============================================================

_Due: {{page.due_date}}_

## Overview
Rewrite your HW04 to use an AVL tree as your main data structure, instead
of a sorted ArrayList.
Recall that the zipcodes in uszipcodes.csv are already listed in lexicographic
order and thus using an unbalanced binary search tree (i.e. LinkedBinaryTree)
will guarantee to result in a linear tree (when you insert in sorted order) and thus
will have worst-case O(n) complexity on all operations. This is why an AVL-tree
is a good choice. Note that the AVL-tree’s advantage over a sorted ArrayList is
not on lookup - both binary search on sorted array and AVL have O(logn) lookup,
however, an AVL supports O(logn) insertion and deletion but an ArrayList only
has O(n) insertion and deletion because of shifting.

### Requirements:

1. Copy over the  `BinaryTree.java` interface from HW05. Next copy over your `LinkedBinaryTree.java` and `AVLTree.java` from Lab10. Ensure your `LinkedBinaryTree` implements the HW05 BinaryTree interface. Ensure your lab is working correctly before moving on. Now, copy over `DriverHW04.java`, `PopulatedPlace.java`, `Place.java`, `LookupZip.java` and `LocatedPlace.java` from HW04. Change the name of `DriverHW04` to `DriverHW08`.

2. toString of AVLTree should be overriden to return a string listing the 
in-order traversal of all elements in the tree, in the following format. Each
element should represented by its zipcode, followed by height in parethesis.
For example, Bryn Mawr should be represented by the string ”19010(1)”, if
the PopulatedPlace representing Bryn Mawr was a leaf on your AVLTree.
Traversal string should be space separated. See section 2

3. Once your AVLTree is functional, modify the rest of the methods to to use
your AVLTree for storage and lookup. For example, think about what methods to use instead of  `set`.

4. Instead of hard-coding the input files, i.e uszipcodes.csv and ziplocs.csv,
switch to taking input file names from commandline arguments, see section 2.

5. The rest of the restrictions and correctness requirements for HWs 01 and 04
remain. Correctness testing (on lookups once the AVL tree is functional)
should be the same as well.

6. Time your new implementation using commandline redirection of `in.txt`
test file from HW01.
That is, issue the
following command at the prompt:
`time java Main -i uszipcodes.csv ziplocs.csv < in.txt > out.txt`

Compare the result with your HW04 implementation. Is there a speedup? 
Report your findings in your README.

### Command Line Input

You will receive the two input files on the command line following the -i flag as
your input, for example: `java Main -i uszipcodes.csv ziplocs.csv`. You can
assume that the first file will follow the uszipcode.csv file format and the second
one will supply additional location information, like ziplocs.csv. In addition,
support the following flags:

1. `-d` indicates that you should print additional debugging information on your
AVL tree, in the following format: height of your AVL tree, as an integer on
its own line, followed by the toString of your tree. For example, if there
are only the following three zipcodes in the input (19010, 91729 and 97252),
your output should be:

```
2
19010(1) 91729(2) 97252(1)
```

Print this additional debugging output before taking query input interac-
tively, as usual. If `-d` is not given, program should behave/output exactly
the same HW01 or HW04.

## Submitting
Submit the following files to the assignment called `HW08` on Gradescope

1. README: The usual plain text file README
  - Your name:
  - How to compile: 
  - How to run it: 

  - Known Bugs and Limitations: List any known bugs, deficiencies, or 
limitations with respect to the project specifications. Documented bugs
will receive less deduction versus uncaught ones.

  - Discussion: Everything listed above
  - How much time you spent on the assignment
  - What did you learn?
  - (Optional): Any feedback or comments

2. Source files: all .java files

Make sure to name these files exactly what we specify here. Otherwise,
our autograders might not work and we might have to take points off.
<br>
**DO NOT** submit a *.docx* or *.pdf* file.
<br>
**DO NOT** submit any `.class` files or any of the `csv` files.
<br>
**DO NOT** submit any of the provided interfaces. We will use the ones
we provide for testing.

#### Copying the files 
You will likely want to submit the files from your own laptop/computer.
To copy the files from `goldengate` to your own machine, 
open up a terminal on your own computer. If you have a mac or linux, you can use the 
Terminal application, if you have a windows you can use the Powershell app.

Run the following command:

```bassh
$ scp <username>@goldengate.cs.brynmawr.edu/home/<username>/cs151/homeworks/hw00/*
```

Make sure to replace `<username>` with your username. `scp` is a command to secure-copy files
from one server to another. In this case, from `goldengate` to your own machine.

